What have I been up to since my last update?

In terms of GeoFox and Heloid, there isn't much to report. I'm still making my way through the wkt-crs parser. The difficulty and scope of that is much larger than I initially expected, and I haven't had as much time to work on it the last few weeks due to a combination of personal commitments (hanging out with friends) and being rather ill this last week. 

One of the largest difficulties with the wkt-crs parser is the fact that it's quite an older format. This means it has a lot of inconsistencies or just generally less than optimal structure. Consider for example

```
CS[ellipsoidal,3],
AXIS["latitude",north,ORDER[1],ANGLEUNIT["degree",0.017]],
AXIS["longitude",east,ORDER[2],ANGLEUNIT["degree",0.017]],
AXIS["ellipsoidal height (h)",up,ORDER[3],LENGTHUNIT["metre",1.0]]
```

The annoying thing here is that each of these `AXIS` are children of the `CS` term. However, you might notice that structurally they're siblings rather than children. This is especially irritating given the wkt-crs language *has* hierarchy, but sometimes that just isn't utilised. Getting around this has been a bit of a pain, and the complexity of the parser continually balloons to keep up with all the edge cases. Maybe in future I can find some simpler way to represent it all.

Nevertheless, progress is happening. I'm working through literally section by section and ticking them off as I complete examples. Hopefully in the next few weeks I can finally complete the parser, which will I think be the largest part of this project.

In terms of other stuff, as I say I haven't had as much time recently but one thing which is quite exciting is I spent a little bit of time sketching out a course on the Trivium and Quadrivium. I've always had a strong interest in classical education and I've written a few articles around the subject, but I think it might be time to really seriously study and produce materials on it.

On the Quadrivium though, I was thinking of a kind of modern reboot. I won't say too much now, but certainly computer science should be a part of a modern Quadrivium!